---
title: Doodle Document Store and Search Engine.
---
Everything is included in Stage 5.

Stage 1: Build an In-Memory Document Store **(HashTable)**
==========================================================

**Due: Sunday, February 21, 11:59PM, ET.**

Description
-----------

In stage 1 you are building a very simple storage mechanism which
supports "get" and "put" of data. Documents are stored in memory in a
hash table and can only be retrieved using the key (URI) with which they
are stored. Documents can be plain text, a.k.a. a String, or binary
data, e.g. images.

Logic Requirements
------------------

#### Implement a HashTable from Scratch

-   Implement a hash table which uses separate chaining to deal with
    collisions.

-   For stage 1, the size of the array that underlies your hash table is
    fixed in size and does not grow or shrink at all. The length of the
    array must be 5.

-   You may not use any Java collection classes or any other data
    structures (besides an array) provided in the JDK, rather you must
    implement the hash table yourself.

-   Your hash table class must be a general purpose
    ([generic](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/generics/index.html))
    class, i.e. not be limited to specific key-value types.

-   It must implement the edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.HashTable interface
    that has been provided to you.

-   It must be called edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.HashTableImpl

#### Implement the Document Interface

-   A Document is made up of a unique identifier
    ([java.net.URI](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/net/URI.html))
    and the data that comprises the content of the document, either a
    java.lang.String for text or a byte\[\] for binary data.

-   You must write a class called
    edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage1.impl.DocumentImpl that implements
    the edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage1.Document interface.

-   DocumentImpl **MUST NOT** implement java.lang.Comparable

-   The hashCode for a Document is calculated as follows:

    \@Override\
    **public int** hashCode() {\
    **int** result **= uri**.hashCode();\
    result **= 31 \*** result **+** (**text != null ? text**.hashCode()
    **: 0**);\
    result **= 31 \*** result **+** Arrays.*hashCode*(**binaryData**);\
    **return** result;\
    }

-   DocumentImpl must override the default equals and hashCode methods.
    Two documents are considered equal if they have the same hashCode.

-   DocumentImpl must provide the following two constructors, which
    should throw an java.lang.IllegalArgumentException if either
    argument is null or empty/blank:

    -   **public** DocumentImpl(URI uri, String txt)

    -   **public** DocumentImpl(URI uri, **byte**\[\] binaryData)

#### Implement a Document Store

-   Implement the edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage1.DocumentStore
    interface, which specifies an API to:

    -   put a document in the store

    -   get a document from the store

    -   delete a document

-   It must be called
    edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage1.impl.DocumentStoreImpl

-   Your document store must use an instance of HashTableImpl to store
    documents in memory.

-   If a user calls deleteDocument, or putDocument with null as the
    value, you must completely remove any/all vestiges of the Document
    with the given URI from your hash table, including any objects
    created to house it. In other words, it should no longer exist
    anywhere in the array, or chained lists, of your hash table.

-   Your code will receive documents as an
    [InputStream](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/io/InputStream.html)
    and the document's key as an instance of
    [URI](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/net/URI.html).
    When a document is added to your document store, you must do the
    following:

    1.  Read the entire contents of the document from the InputStream
        into a byte\[\]

    2.  Create an instance of DocumentImpl with the URI and the String
        or byte\[\]that was passed to you.

    3.  Insert the Document object into the hash table with URI as the
        key and the Document object as the value

    4.  Return the hashCode of the previous document that was stored in
        the hashTable at that URI, or zero if there was none

#### Other requirements on your implementation

-   You must fully implement the interfaces defined in the code provided
    to you under the stage1 folder. Other than constructors, you may not
    add any public or protected methods in your implementations of these
    interfaces. **Any additional methods you add must be private.**

-   The name of your implementation classes should be the name of the
    interface with "Impl" (short for "implementation") added to the end,
    and be located in a sub-package called "impl". That means that you
    must, at a minimum, submit the following classes in your solution:

    -   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage1.impl.DocumentImpl

    -   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage1.impl.DocumentStoreImpl

    -   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.HashTableImpl

-   Make sure the name of your **i**mpl **package** starts with a lower
    case "i", not an upper case "I". The "I" in your class names, on the
    other hand, e.g. Document**I**mpl, must be upper case.

-   DO NOT move the interfaces to a different package -- they must
    remain in the packages in which they were placed in the code you are
    given.

-   HashTable**I**mpl and DocumentStore**I**mpl must both have
    no-argument constructors.

Stage 2: Add Undo Support to the Document Store Using a **Stack**. Your First Exposure to Functional Programing in Java.
========================================================================================================================

**Due:** **Sunday, March 7, 11:59PM, ET.**

Description
-----------

In this stage you add support for two different types of undo 1) undo
the last action, no matter what document it was done to 2) undo the last
action on a specific Document.

You will also get your first experience with functional programming in
Java.

Logic Requirements
------------------

1.  ### Update HashTableImpl

    1.  Implement array doubling on the array used in your HashTableImpl
        to support unlimited entries. Don't forget to re-hash all your
        entries after doubling the array!

    2.  Add a no-arguments constructor to HashTableImpl if you didn't
        already have one.

2.  ### Add Undo Support via a Command Stack

<!-- -->

1.  Every call to DocumentStore.putDocument and
    DocumentStore.deleteDocument must result in the adding of a new
    instance of edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.Command to a single Stack
    which serves as your **command stack**

    a.  No other class besides your document store may have any
        access/references to the command stack; it must be a private
        field within DocumentStoreImpl

    b.  You must use the Command class given to you to model commands.
        You may not alter in any way, or subclass, Command.

    c.  You must write a class called
        edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.StackImpl which is found in its
        own .java file and implements the interface provided to you
        called edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.Stack, and your command stack
        must be an instance of StackImpl.

    d.  StackImpl must have a constructor that takes no arguments.

2.  If a user calls DocumentStore.undo(), then your DocumentStore must
    undo the last command on the stack

3.  If a user calls DocumentStore.undo(URI),then your DocumentStore must
    undo the last command on the stack that was done on the Document
    whose key is the given URI, without having any **permanent** effects
    on any commands that are on top of it in the command stack.

4.  Undo must be achieved by DocumentStore calling the Command.undo
    method on the Command that represents the action to be undone.
    DocumentStore **may not** implement the actual undo logic itself,
    although it must manage the command stack and determine which undo
    to call on which Command.

### Undo Logic

-   There are two cases you must deal with to undo a call to
    DocumentStore.putDocument:

    1.  The call to putDocument added a brand new Document to the
        DocumentStore

    2.  The call to putDocument resulted in overwriting an existing
        Document with the same URI in the DocumentStore

-   To undo a call to DocumentStore.deleteDocument, you must put
    whatever was deleted back into the DocumentStore exactly as it was
    before

-   **DO NOT add any new commands to the command stack in your undo
    logic. In other words, the undo itself is not "recorded" as a
    command on the command stack, rather it simply causes the undoing of
    some pre-existing command. Once the undo process is completely done,
    there is no record at all of the fact that an undo took place.**

### Functional Implementations for Undo

-   As stated above, every put and delete done on your DocumentStore
    must result in the adding of a new Command onto your command stack.

-   Undo must be defined as lambda functions that are passed as
    arguments to the Command constructor.

-   You must read Chapter 19 in "Building Java Programs" (Reges) to
    learn about lambdas, closures, and functions. Alternatively, you can
    read [Modern Java
    Recipes](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/modern-java-recipes/9781491973165/).
    Once you learn about lambdas and closures, you should understand how
    to implement your undo as lambda functions.

### **Methods Added to Preexisting Classes or Interfaces for Stage 2**

-   DocumentStore.undo()

-   DocumentStore.undo(URI)

Stage 3: Keyword Search Using a Trie
====================================

**Due: Thursday, April 8, 11:59PM, ET.**

Description
-----------

In this stage you will add key word search capability to your document
store. That means a user can call DocumentStore.search(keyword) to get a
list of documents in your document store that contain the given keyword.
The data structure used for searching is a Trie.

Logic Requirements
------------------

### 1. Create a Trie Which Will Be Used for Searching Your Document Store:

**You must create a class** edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.TrieImpl **in
which you implement the** edu.yu.cs.com1302.project.Trie **interface.**
An Abstract class has been provided -
edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.TooSimpleTrie -- which includes the Trie
logic and API that we saw in class. It does NOT do all that is needed
for this stage NOR is its API exactly like the one for this project; it
is just an example. Do not extend TooSimpleTrie, but feel free to
cut-and-paste any of its code into yours.

### 2. Miscellaneous Points:

-   Searching and word counting are CASE INSENSITIVE. That means that in
    both the keyword and the document, "THE", "the", "ThE", "tHe", etc.
    are all considered to be the same word.

-   Search results are returned in **descending** order. That means that
    the document in which a word appears the most times is first in the
    returned list, the document with the second most matches is second,
    etc.

-   Document **MUST NOT** implement java.lang.Comparable

-   TrieImpl **must** use a java.util.Comparator\<Document\> to sort
    collections of documents by how many times a given word appears in
    them, when implementing Trie.getAllSorted and any other Trie methods
    that return a sorted collection.

-   TrieImpl **must** have a constructor that takes no arguments

-   Any search method in TrieImpl or DocumentStoreImpl that returns a
    collection **must** return an empty collection, **not** **null**, if
    there are no matches.

### 3. When a Document is Added to the DocumentStore

-   You must go through the document and create a java.util.HashMap that
    will be stored in the Document object that maps all the words in the
    document to the number of times the word appears in the document.

    -   Be sure to ignore all characters that are not a letter or a
        number!

    -   This will help you both for implementing Document.wordCount and
        also for its interactions with the Trie

-   For each word that appears in the Document, add the Document to the
    Value collection at the appropriate Node in the Trie

    -   The Trie stores **collections** of Documents at each node, not
        **individual** documents!

### 4. When a Document is Deleted from DocumentStore

1.  You must delete **all** references to it within **all** parts of the
    Trie.

2.  If the Document being removed is that last one at that node in the
    Trie, you must delete it and all ancestors between it and the
    closest ancestor that has at least one document in its Value
    collection.

### 5. Undo

All Undo logic must now also deal with updating the Trie appropriately.
Because undo must now deal with an undo action affecting multiple
documents at once, the command API has been changed to include the
classes listed below. Please see the comments on those classes.

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.Undoable

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.GenericCommand

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.CommandSet

The command stack must be an instance of StackImpl\<Undoable\>. If a
command involves a single document, you will create and push an instance
of GenericCommand onto the command stack. If, however, the command
involves multiple documents / URIs, you will use an instance of
CommandSet to capture the information about the changes to each
document. **The CommandSet should only be removed from the command stack
once the CommandSet has no commands left in it due to undo(uri) being
called on the URIs of all the commands in the command set.**

### Methods Added to Preexisting Interfaces for Stage 3

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage3.Document.wordCount(word)

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage3.DocumentStore.search(keyword)

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage3.DocumentStore.deleteAll(keyword)

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage3.DocumentStore.searchByPrefix(prefix)

-   edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage3.DocumentStore.deleteAllWithPrefix(prefix)

Stage 4: Memory Management, Part 1: Tracking Document Usage via a Heap
======================================================================

**Due: Monday, April 26, 11:59PM, ET.**

Description
-----------

In this stage you will use a **min** Heap to track the usage of
documents in the document store. Only a fixed number of documents are
allowed in memory at once, and when that limit is reached, adding an
additional document must result in the least recently used document
being deleted from memory (i.e. **all references** to it are removed,
thus allowing Java to garbage collect it.)

Logic Requirements
------------------

### 1. Queue Documents by Usage Time via a MinHeap

You are given an abstract class called
edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.MinHeap. You must extend and complete this
abstract class as a new class called
edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.MinHeapImpl. After a Document is used and
its lastUsedTime is updated, that Document may now be in the wrong place
in the Heap, therefore you must call MinHeapImpl.reHeapify. The job of
reHeapify is to determine whether the Document whose time was updated
should stay where it is, move up in the heap, or move down in the heap,
and then carry out any move that should occur.

MinHeapImpl must have a constructor that takes no arguments. Document
must now extend Comparable\<Document\>, and the comparison must be made
based on the last use time (see next point) of each document.

### 2. Track Document Usage Time

The Document interface has 2 new methods:\
**long** getLastUseTime();\
**void** setLastUseTime(**long** timeInNanoSeconds);\
Every time a document is used, its last use time should be updated to
the relative JVM time, as measured in nanoseconds (see
[java.lang.System.nanoTime()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/System.html#nanoTime()).)
A Document is considered to be "used" whenever it is accessed as a
result of a call to any part of DocumentStore's **public** API. In other
words, if it is "**put**", or returned in any form as the result of
**any** "get" or "search" request, or an action on it is **undone** via
any call to either of the DocumentStore.undo methods.

### 3. Enforce Memory Limits

The DocumentStore interface has 2 new methods:

*/\*\*\
\* set maximum number of documents that may be stored\
\* **\@param limit\
**\*/\
***void** setMaxDocumentCount(**int** limit);\
\
*/\*\*\
\* set maximum number of bytes of memory that may be used by all the
documents in memory combined\
\* **\@param limit\
**\*/\
***void** setMaxDocumentBytes(**int** limit);

When your program first starts, there are no memory limits. However, the
user may call either (or both) of the methods shown above on your
DocumentStore to set limits on the storage used by documents. If both
setters have been called by the user, then memory is considered to be
full if **either** limit is reached.

**For purposes of this project, the memory usage of a document defined
as the total number of bytes in the document's in-memory representation.
For text, that's the length of the array returned by
[String.getBytes()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html#getBytes()),
and for a binary document it is the length of the binary data, i.e. the
byte\[\].**

When carrying out a "put" or an "undo" will push the DocumentStore above
either memory limit, the document store must get the least recently used
Document from the MinHeap, and then erase **all traces** of that
document from the DocumentStore; it should no longer exist in the Trie,
in any Undo commands, or anywhere else in memory. This must be done for
as many least-recently-used documents as necessary until there is enough
memory below the limit to carry out the "put" or "undo".

For example, assume that 1) the MaxDocumentBytes has been set to 10MB,
2) there are nine 1MB files already in memory and 3) the user calls
DocumentStore.put with a document whose size is 5MB. In this case you
have to delete the four least-recently-used documents in memory in order
to be able to put the new 5MB document.

### Methods Added to Preexisting Interfaces for Stage 4

See the interfaces supplied to you and their comments for details

-   Document.getLastUseTime()

-   Document.setLastUseTime(timeInNanoseconds)

-   DocumentStore.setMaxDocumentCount(limit)

-   DocumentStore.setMaxDocumentBytes(limit)

Stage 5: Memory Management, Part 2: Two Tier Storage (RAM and Disk) Using a Btree
=================================================================================

**Due: Tuesday, May 11, 6:00PM, ET.**

Description
-----------

In stage \#4 a document that had to be removed from memory due to memory
limits was simply erased from existence. In this stage, we will write it
to disk and bring it back into memory if it is needed. You will continue
to use a MinHeap to track the usage of documents in the document store,
and you will continue to use the Trie for keyword search. HashTableImpl,
however, is completely removed from your system, and replaced with a
BTree for storing your documents. While the BTree itself will stay in
memory, the documents it stores can move back and forth between disk and
memory, as dictated by memory usage limits.

Logic Requirements
------------------

### 1. Replace HashTable with BTree

The primary storage structure for documents will now be a BTree instead
of a HashTable. All traces of the HashTable you have used until now must
be deleted from your code. You must implement
edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.BTree and your implementation of the BTree
must be called edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.BTreeImpl. You have been
given edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.impl.WrongBTree; this implementation is
NOT exactly what you need -- it has some features that you DO NOT need,
and it does not deal with moving things to/from to disk. You may cut and
paste whatever parts of it you wish into your code, but DO NOT extend
this class -- it is merely an example and should NOT be used as-is.

An entry in the BTree can have 3 different things as its Value:

1.  If the entry is in an internal BTree node, the value must be a link
    to another node in the BTree

2.  If the entry is in a leaf/external BTree node, the value can be
    either:

    a.  a pointer to a Document object in memory OR...

    b.  a reference to where the document is stored on disk (IFF it has
        been written out to disk.)

### 2. Memory Management

You will continue to track memory usage against limits, and when a limit
is exceeded you will use your MinHeap to identify the least recently
used doc, as you did in stage \#4. **HOWEVER**:

1.  When a document has to be kicked out of memory, instead of it being
    deleted completely it will be written to disk via a call to
    BTree.moveToDisk. When a document is moved to disk, the entry in the
    BTree has a reference to the file on disk as its value instead of a
    reference to the document in memory. When a document is written out
    to disk, it is removed from the MinHeap which is managing memory.

2.  No data structure in your document store other than the BTree should
    have a direct reference to the Document object. Other data
    structures should only have the document URI, and call BTree.get
    whenever they need any piece of information from the document, e.g.
    it's lastUseTime, its byte\[\], etc.

    -   Even though this means the MinHeap will have to call the BTree
        every time it wants to compare the lastUseTime of two documents,
        and this is very inefficient, we neither want to complicate this
        project more by dealing with mechanisms to synch the two, nor do
        we want to allow the MinHeap to directly reference document
        objects, so we will just accept this inefficiency.

3.  If BTree.get is called with a key/URI whose document has been
    written to disk, that document must be brought back into memory. If
    bringing it into memory causes memory limits to be exceeded, other
    documents must be written out to disk until the memory limit is
    conformed with. When a document is brought back into memory from
    disk:

    -   its lastUseTime must be set to the current time

    -   its file on disk must be deleted

4.  If BTree.put is called with a key/URI that already has an entry in
    the BTree but its document has been written to disk, i.e. the
    document on disk is going to be deleted and replaced with a new
    document, DocumentPersistenceManager.delete must be called within
    the BTree.put logic in order to delete the old document from disk

### 3. Document Serialization and Deserialization

#### 3.1 What to Serialize

You do not serialize the lasUseTime. You must serialize/deserialize:

1.  the contents of the document (String or binary)

2.  the URI

3.  the wordcount map.

**The following has been added to the Document interface:**

**Map\<String,Integer\> getWordMap();\
This must return a copy of the wordcount map so it can be serialized**

**\
void setWordMap(Map\<String,Integer\> wordMap);**

**This must set the wordcount map during deserialization**

#### 3.2 Document (De)Serialization

-   BTreeImpl MUST NOT implement (de)serialization itself. When
    DocumentStoreImpl is initialing itself, it must call
    BTreeImpl.setPersistenceManager and pass it an instance of
    edu.yu.cs.com1320.project.stage5.impl.DocumentPersistenceManager
    which will do all the disk I/O for the BTree. BTreeImpl uses the
    DocumentPersistenceManager for [all]{.underline} disk I/O.

-   You must complete the DocumentPersistenceManager class, whose
    skeleton has been given to you.

-   By default, your DocumentPersistenceManager will
    serialize/deserialize to/from the working directory of your
    application (see user.dir property
    [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/environment/sysprop.html).)
    However, if the caller passes in a non-null baseDir as a constructor
    argument when creating the DocumentPersistenceManager, then all
    serialization/deserialization occurs from that directory instead.

-   DocumentPersistenceManager should use instances of
    com.google.gson.JsonSerializer\<Document\> and
    com.google.gson.JsonDeserializer\<Document\> to (de)serialize
    from/to disk.

-   You also must add another constructor to DocumentStoreImpl that
    accept File baseDir as an argument, and it must pass that baseDir to
    the DocumentPersistenceManager constructor.

-   Documents must be written to disk as [JSON](https://www.json.org/)
    documents. You must use the [GSON](https://github.com/google/gson)
    library for this.

Some details about your use of GSON:

1.  you must write a custom JsonDeserializer /JsonSerializer for
    Documents

2.  You must add the maven dependencies for GSON to your pom.xml file.

3.  **VERY IMPORTANT LINKS FOR YOU REGARDING HOW TO (DE)SERIALIZE YOUR
    DOCUMENTS:**

    a.  [**GSON user's
        guide**](https://github.com/google/gson/blob/master/UserGuide.md)

    b.  **[How to Encode and Decode JSON Byte
        Array](https://devqa.io/encode-decode-json-byte-array/)** - you
        will need this info if your document is a byte\[\], not text

Maven dependency:\
\<dependency\>\
\<groupId\>com.google.code.gson\</groupId\>\
\<artifactId\>gson\</artifactId\>\
\<version\>2.8.6\</version\>\
\</dependency\>

#### 3.3 Converting URIs to location for Serialized files

Let's assume the user gives your doc a URI of
"http://www.yu.edu/documents/doc1". The JSON file for that document
should be stored under \[base
directory\]/www.yu.edu/documents/doc1.json. In other words, remove the
"http://", and then convert the remaining path of the URI to a file path
under your base directory. Each path segment represents a directory, and
the namepart of the URI represents the name of your file. You must add
".json" to the end of the file name.

### 4. Undo

All Undo logic must now also deal with moving things to/from disk in the
BTree.
